---
layout: recipes
title: Friable apple pie
volume: cookbook
menu: desserts
tag: desserts and breakfast
buttonStyle: fg-guide-sect
backgroundStyle: bg-guide-sect
youtube: eazZvfyhYK0
attribution: Joy of Baking
attributionLink: https://www.youtube.com/@joyofbaking
music: https://open.spotify.com/user/tesslaree/playlist/0SROPJuM0gG4mwGCBNOOKL?
additional:
  - name: Scrumptious apple pie
    link: https://www.bettycrocker.com/recipes/scrumptious-apple-pie/c9a4acc6-85aa-4128-b0b0-1a17bdbe05e0
  - name: Bulgarian apple and semolina cake
    link: https://4-cooc.com/baking-recipes/apple-pies/bulgarian-cake-with-apples-and-semolina/
time: 90
serves: 5
---

A family classic. I've always loved the smell of cinnamon while the apple was braising. Less so in the stew we cooked afterwards in the same pan.
<!-- excerpt-end -->

{% assign dataFile = site.data.cookbook.desserts.apple-pie %}

{% capture kitchenware %}
1. an ovenproof baking tray, approximately 35cm long, 20cm wide, 5cm deep;
2. a grater and a pealer;
3. a non-stick frying pan;
{% endcapture %}

{% capture steps %}

3. Peal the washed apples, cut them in quarters, and remove the seeds. Grate the apples on the coarse shred side. After grating all the apples, squeeze handfuls with your hands to get rid of access juice. Keep the juice and drink it while fresh. It's tasty.
4. Take a frying pan and add the grated and juiced apples. No greasing is needed. Add sugar and cinnamon to your taste. Stir occasionally. It's ready when the apple is soft. Let it cool down before adding it to the pie.
5. Grate the butter into the mix of flour, sugar, baking powder, and crumble the mixture between your fingers.
6. Add the egg yolk and the sour cream, and work the mixture with your hand into a ball quickly, so it does not melt.
7. Separate the ball into two smaller ones.
8. With a rolling pin, stretch one of the balls out into the size of the baking tray.
9. Lay this down at the bottom of the tray, and adjust the sides with your hands to make sure all sides are snug.
10. Scoop the fried apples within the tray and spread it out evenly.
11. Using the second ball of dough, make the covering layer on top of the pie. You can coarse shred the dough, form strips and make a grid of it, or simply stretch it into a sheet as for the bottom layer. Cover the pie. If you choose the full sheet, punch holes in it with a fork (not all the way to the bottom), and smear sour cream on top.
12. In a preheated oven, bake at 180 degrees for approximately 30 minutes.
{% endcapture %}

{% include guide/recipe-card.html kitchenware=kitchenware steps=steps tip1=tip1 tip2=tip2 tip3=tip3 %}