---
layout: post
branch: Twist
tag: Special interests
author: Daniel
title: Special interests - An introduction to this category
buttonStyle: fg-blog-note
backgroundStyle: bg-blog-note
---

This is the first, introductory post of the special interests blog category. I do not plan to post too many things here, but I wanted to dedicate some space to do advocacy for topics that interest us and don't fit tightly in the {{ site.brand }} scope.
<!-- excerpt-end -->

### Science communication - Interest 1

You will find posts related to all things science communication. This will include sections from my PhD thesis chapter on science communication to better understand what it is. I will share science communication projects created by other people. I'll also try and share good reading materials on science communication. Of course, science communication with accessibility in mind will get bonus points when posting about them.

I might even attempt my own mini science communication series. I've long wanted to write a few posts about our kitchen, the physics laboratory that everyone has in their home. Have you ever thought how many scientific equipment you have in your kitchen? A chamber of high temperature, a radiation container, a specimen cooler, and much more that we know how to use, but we don't necessarily know how they work. Wouldn't it be cool to learn more about the physics of our household?

Long story short, science and technology does not solve all problems, but without science and technology, no problems could be solved. So through these science communication blog posts, I wish to make science into something digestible, something friendly, for people with all abilities, disabilities, and interests.

### Entrepreneurship - A teaser for further interests

This project wouldn't exist without an interest in entrepreneurship.
Through a few posts, I will explore what it is, and what parts of entrepreneurship caught my attention.
But we won't stop there.
Topics, such as haptics may also find their way into this category.