---
layout: post
title: Leadership in self-advocacy - How I won an award
author: Danielle Garratt
reviewer: Daniel Hajas
updated: 2023-01-20
branch: Twist
tag: Living with disabilities
buttonStyle: fg-blog-note
backgroundStyle: bg-blog-note
image: danielle-award.jpg
alt: Danielle is holding an award, in front of a white wall.
---

Recently I've got an award for leadership in self-advocacy. It was an honour to get this award and be a part of an amazing celebration.
<!-- excerpt-end -->

## How I found out about the award

I was working at Brighton and Hove Speak Out, when I was told that my colleagues were putting me up for the [Dimensions Leaders list award](https://dimensions-uk.org/dimensions-campaigns/meet-leaders-list-award-winners/find-out-more/enter-leaders-list/). I was nominated in the "Advocacy, Policy, Media" category of the leaders in learning disability and autism list. When I got told that I was up for this award from Dimensions I was excited and nervous that I wouldn’t get chosen as there are many different people with a learning disability that could get the award. 

## What is Dimensions? 

Dimensions is one of the UK’s largest not-for-profit organisations supporting people with learning disabilities, autism, behaviours of distress and those with complex health needs. 

>“I’m getting the confidence to speak up, I feel proud of myself. I would not have done this before. I can’t believe I would be training people at an international conference on inclusive research, and I never thought I would be involved in writing an article or a book that will be published.” - Me, Danielle Garratt

## The award celebration

On the day of the award, it was on zoom, so I did it in the comfort of my own home.
The celebration was hosted by BBC Radio 2’s Ken Bruce who has experience with learning disabilities and autism as his son is autistic.
During the awards I didn’t have a clue where I would be.
I was told way in advance that I had won.
Being in a room with all different people who had won the award felt amazing.
Seeing other people who have done wonderful work made me feel proud to be one of them.
The atmosphere felt fantastic to be a part of.
Having people say in the chat well done Danielle was great.
I felt loved seeing how many people were so supportive to me. 